Welcome to our simple and proven guide on how to be a responsible traveller in 2020.

We believe that through the ways we travel, the regions we decide to visit, and the choices we make on how we spend our money and where , can have a positive impact on communities and families that are not as fortunate as ourselves.

Another name for it is ‘responsible travel’.


1) Pack Light & Explore Your Own Backyard : “I would say the first thing you can do is pack light.Don’t go out and buy unnecessary travel items; in fact, most travel items are really not needed. You don’t need a lot when you travel, so don’t consume just because something is sold or promoted as making travel easier.

It really won’t make enough of a  difference to justify the consumerism.

Secondly, explore your own country before venturing further afield. 

Most people jet off to destinations far away and do so in the most comfortable (read: irresponsible) way possible. Not a lot of people decide to stay in their own country and get to know it more intimately.

This way you can choose more environmentally sound travel options like walking and cycling — depending on where you are located — and gain a much deeper appreciation for what you have close by.”

2) Buy Locally-Sourced Products
“Wherever you go, try to live like the locals. This is always your best shot to empower the local economy.

Eat at local restaurants — the smaller and most casual it is, the best chances you have to eat well.

Additionally, sleep at family-owned bed and breakfasts or use Airbnb-like websites to stay at someone’s place directly.

Use public transport and buy local. Try to find places where you can buy directly from producers and/or artisans, be it for your daily meals, clothes or even souvenirs.

Meanwhile, visit attractions that respect the local culture and environment rather than damage it.

If you can, participate in a workshop to learn more about local life, such as a cooking class.”

3. Be kind to the environment. If you are enjoying a white sandy beach or a vibrant coral reef, do your part to keep them that way. It goes without saying that we’re not littering anymore, right? Also keep in mind that every plastic bottle of water you buy will end up in a landfill or, in places without organized trash collection, on the street of the city you’re staying in (you’ll never see me without my reusable water bottle). For that same reason, when I’m traveling to a developing country I make sure to take everything I can out of its packaging while I’m packing – not only does it save you space in your bag, but it cuts down on pollution at your destination.

If you’re planning on enjoying a dip in the ocean (aren’t we all?), make sure to pack reef-friendly sunscreen. Research has shown that even small amounts of most sunscreen can destroy coral reefs. Our planet is on the brink of losing many of these beautiful places – which is why we’re blowing our budget to see the Great Barrier Reef this summer while it’s still there – but there’s also evidence that these unique ecosystems can bounce back if given the chance. So check the ingredients on your sunscreen carefully, or even better, just pack an extra t-shirt or a rash guard to protect you from the sun while you’re in the water. (Our favorite sunscreen is Raw Elements – enter the code TWODUSTYTRAVELERS at checkout and they’ll give you 10% off!)

4)  Don’t give money to children. When we see kids begging, everyone wants to help. While that instinct comes from a good place, doing so only contributes to the cycle of poverty. At best it encourages kids to skip school to beg, and at worst the children may be part of a trafficking scheme that abducts children and exploits them for money. If you really want to help, look into supporting local organizations that fight poverty and improve access to education.

5) Dress appropriately. I didn’t know until I landed in East Africa for the first time that it was considered scandalous for a woman’s thighs to be visible. Did I throw on the shorts I’d packed anyway because that’s not my problem? Of course not. I ended up buying some long wrap skirts at the local market and now I can’t get enough of them.

On another trip, I was embarrassed to see American women wandering through a majority-Muslim city in skimpy sundresses, when it was common knowledge that women were expected to cover their shoulders and knees. You are not endearing yourself to a place and its people by openly flouting their cultural norms.

You can find these details for any destination with a quick google search or inside any good guidebook. Lonely Planet books come with us everywhere and they’ve never steered us wrong.


6) Learn a little of the language. Just a few phrases, you don’t have to be fluent! Saying hello to someone in their native tongue immediately starts your interaction off on the right foot. That small effort is an easy way to show people that you care about their culture. It’s always shocking to me that some tourists expect everyone to automatically speak English. That’s quite arrogant, actually! Plus a few important words can save your skin in a pinch. I like to arrive prepared to say at least: Hello, please, thank you, bathroom, and vegetarian. I’m a big fan of the free app Duolingo for learning languages!

7) Photograph respectfully: keep in mind what perception your photos are portraying to the world. If you’re traveling in a developing country and sharing pictures of slums and impoverished children, what story are you telling? You wouldn’t visit a friend’s home town and then share the worst parts of it. As a nurse who travels often on medical missions, it would be easy for me to only share the most tragic images from the places I’ve been. But even in the most difficult locations, it’s not hard to find unique beauty and amazing people. I’d rather share the whole story that helps us recognize our common humanity than focus on narrow images that breed only pity.

8) LEAVE ONLY FOOTPRINTS (AND CLEAN UP OTHER PEOPLE'S) 

-------

9) SHOP LOCALLY
When it comes to eating, sleeping and buying souvenirs, choosing where you spend your money can have a massive impact on the community.

By having dinner at a hole-in-the-wall restaurant, staying in a family-run guest house or purchasing a trinket from a street vendor, you are helping to inject money directly into the local economy.

Besides creating a more authentic travel experience for yourself, you are also helping someone create a better life for themselves.

Buying from a multinational corporation will only see most of your tourist dollars go straight into the pockets of shareholders and business directors.

10) THINK BEFORE YOU ACT WITH WILDLIFE ACTIVITIES
When making plans for an overseas vacation, a lot of people have exotic dreams of riding elephants, swimming with dolphins or having their photos taken with tigers, but these irresponsible activities often do more harm than good.

Wildlife tourism is big business, and most of these operators think about the profits before the well-being of the animals.

Remember that for one hour of entertainment for yourself, you could be contributing to a lifetime of distress for the animal.

11) RESPECT THE LOCAL CULTURE
One of the greatest rewards we can have when we travel is learning about different cultures and religions.

The world and its people are diverse and fascinating, and it is an astonishing feeling being privileged enough to experience it.

We must keep in mind how important it is to show respect to those local customs and traditions when we travel.

Many countries are more conservative with their dress sense, and wearing short shorts or singlets may be considered to be inappropriate.

Take the time to learn a little bit of the local language (even if it is just ‘hello’ and ‘thank you’), just like you would expect visitors to your home country to do.

Study what the customs are of where you are travelling to to ensure you don’t inadvertently offend anyone.


12) MINIMISE YOUR WASTE
Waste management can be a major issue in most developing countries, and we as travellers often unknowingly contribute to this problem.

The education levels when it comes to recycling and minimising waste in other countries may not be the same as what we receive back home, so it is important to take your own steps to help out the environment.

Say no to plastic bags from shops and instead put your items in a backpack or a cloth bag.

Eat and drink in the cafe rather than going for take away (or carry a KeepCup with you, which we always do).

Carry a reusable water bottle with you and fill up from large water jugs that can be found in most hotels and restaurants.


13)  LOWER YOUR FOOTPRINT
There are a lot of great ways to lower your environmental impact when you are travelling.

Instead of always taking taxis to get you from A to B, see if a local bus can get you to where you need to go.

If the distance you need to go isn’t too far, walk instead of jumping on public transport for one or two stops.

If you really want a great way to explore an area, rent a bicycle! Not only is it good for the environment, but it is good for your travelling budget and your health too!

14) DON’T GIVE TO BEGGARS
Now this one really is a hard one, as most of us feel completely heartbroken when we see people (especially children) begging in the streets.

But it is important to remember that begging only encourages local people to continue asking tourists for money.

As a result, there are many destinations that end up with people begging who are pretending to be worse off than they are in order to extort money off of foreigners.

When it comes to children who ask for money, in places like Cambodia parents often take them out of school to beg on streets, and in the worst cases they may be part of a larger network run by unscrupulous characters who keep the money for themselves.

Obviously use your discretion with this one, but if you really want to help out, perhaps buy the person some food or water instead.

Also try and seek out local organisations who work with underprivileged people in the area and ask if they require any assistance.

15) EDUCATE OTHERS TO BE RESPONSIBLE TRAVELLERS
Being a responsible traveller might come naturally to some, but others may just not be aware of the implications their actions can have when they are abroad.If you see someone unintentionally doing something that is detrimental to the environment or to the local people and culture, perhaps mention something in a friendly way.

Start discussions about responsible travel with people in your hostel, hotel or who you are on tour with. It is only through education that we can help spread the word about sustainable tourism.

Before you head out on your gap year learn how to be an ethical and sustainable traveller.

If you have any other questions, thoughts or ideas, or are a business looking to implement sustainable practices, please feel free to get in contact with us.

Remember, our actions can have a big impact on the world while we travel. Make sure it is a positive one.